Two key types of data:

organic / process data
Generated organically, often over time, as the result of a process
Can result in very large data sets -> "Big Data"
Processing can require significant computational resources. Even just getting the data in a format that can be mined can require lots of resources.
Ex: Netflix viewing history
Ex: Weather station data collected over time
"designed" data collection
Individuals sampled from a population
Trying to learn more about a target population
Typically smaller data sets
Data collected for very specific reasons, rather than reflections of ongoing processes
Ex: Interviewing people on their opinion
In both cases, are the data i.i.d.?

i: Independent
i.d: Identically distributed
Given i.i.d data, you can estimate features of the distribution with a certain amount of precision. Example: mean, std, etc.
If not i.i.d.?

Ex: If students are cheating, students sitting next to each other have similar scores.
Variability between data, not identically distributed.
Need different analytic procedures. Need to account for dependencies and differences.
Always ask where the data came from! Always ask when you can assume data is i.i.d.

Quantitative variables

Numerical, measurable quantities in which arithmetic operations often make sense
Continuous: Could take any value within an interval, many possible values
Discrete: Countable value, finite number of values
Categorical (or qualitative) variable

Classifies individuals or items into different groups
Ordinal: groups have an order or ranking, such as freshman
Nominal: Groups are merely names, no ranking, such as marital status
Considering the data in this table:

BMI is numerical, continuous
Race is categorical, coded so that each integer represents a category
Age is numerical, discrete? Even though it is reported as just an integer, time is often considered continuous.
Adult is 0 or 1, it is categorical nominal.
Exploratory vs Confirmatory
Confirmatory: Scientific method, specify a fasifiable hypothesis and then test it. Collect data to address a single pre-specified question.
Exploratory: Collect and analyze data without first pre-specifying a question. Watch out for overfitting, multiple testing, p-hacking.
The more questions you ask from a dataset, the more likely you are to draw a misleading conclusion.

Comparative vs non-comparative
Comparative: Contrast one population to another
Non-comparative: Estimating or predicting quantitative values. Ex: Predict stock performance

Observational data and experiments
Observational: arises "naturally"
Experimental: involves manipulation or assignment

Power and bias
Power analysis: Process to assess whether a given study design is likely to yield meaningful findings
Bias: Measurements that are systematically off-target, or sample is not representative of population of interest. Observational studies are especially vulnerable to bias

Discrete data ->Integers
Continuous data -?Floats